Optimizing Radeon VRAM behavior
===============================

[glossary]
Glossary
--------

[glossary]
buffer::
	A block of memory used for some purpose. For example, a texture.

Catalyst::
	AMD's proprietary graphics driver.

FPS::
	Frames per second, a common performance metric.

Frame time::
	The inverse of FPS, ie. (milli)seconds per frame.

Linux::
	An open-source operating system

mipmapping::
	A technique of accessing pre-scaled versions of a texture.

r600g::
	The open-source Gallium3D graphics driver responsible for Radeon HD 2000 - HD6000 
	models.

RAM::
	Random Access Memory, a type of computer memory.

texture::
	A buffer consisting of image data.

VRAM::
	Video RAM, fast on-board memory included on graphics cards.

Introduction
------------

Graphics cards carry some fast, dedicated memory (VRAM). This memory is used to speed up 
tasks such as rendering or parallel computations, by avoiding the latency in having the 
graphics card access the system memory.

VRAM is a limited resource, and as such, all workloads may not fit in a given graphics 
card. In a situation like that, the strategy that decides what parts of the working set to 
keep in VRAM, and which parts can be kept in regular system RAM, is of utmost importance.

If the application needs to access a specific resource in system RAM, it will have a 
corresponding hit in its performance. The VRAM placement strategy should try to rank the 
application's buffers in such a way to maximize the application's performance.

Application performance is commonly measured in two ways: throughput (FPS, frames per 
second) and responsiveness (how stable the FPS is). For a good user experience, they both 
must be above some user-dependent threshold.

There are no generally accepted guidelines, as the minimum for an acceptable experience is 
quite subjective. However, many people place the line at 60 FPS with a minimum FPS of 55.
(Minimum playable FPS, 2012)

Both throughput and smoothness must be above the user's minimum requirements, one alone will 
not suffice. For example, a game running at a healthy throughput of 60 FPS, but dipping to 
10 FPS once per second will be extremely irritating, perceived as stalling or stuttering. 
Vice versa, a smooth FPS of 20 will not stutter, but the throughput is not high enough for 
an enjoyable experience, as the user will notice individual images instead of the illusion 
of movement.

Problem definition
------------------

The open source graphics drivers on Linux are generally thought of as lower performance, but 
higher stability, than the proprietary drivers provided by the graphics card companies. This 
is a result of the bar for quality in public work; each new version of a proprietary driver 
generally includes many application-specific changes (Catalyst 13.1 release notes, 2013).

Recent advances in optimization have brought the r600g driver close to competing with the 
proprietary Catalyst driver (Larabel, M. 2013a). Depending on the benchmark and hardware, it 
is within 60% - 110% of the Catalyst driver, generally around 80%.

One of the remaining areas yet to be optimized is the VRAM placing strategy. In this 
thesis, research will be done on improving this area of the r600g driver.

There are some practical constraints that the solution will need to abide by. First, there 
is no central location with a holistic view of everything that happens on the graphics card. 
Secondly, the run-time performance of the strategy itself must be adequate. It may have to 
make thousands of decisions per second; having performance go down because the computer is 
thinking on how to improve performance would be counterproductive.

A perfect solution would know everything that goes on in the system. It could predict 
exactly what the application will do next, and in what way does it access each buffer. 
Sadly, either of those is a luxury not available in the real world.

While recording the way the application accesses each buffer is possible in theory, this 
would incur more overhead than could be gained. Thus, the strategy is limited to considering 
worst-case possibilities, and has to make decisions as if the application would use each 
buffer fully. In practice, many buffers are not fully read or written, but only parts of 
them are used, for example due to mipmapping.

The current strategy used in r600g is a simple LRU (least recently used) list. While simple, 
it can lead to quite bad user experience in non-trivial cases that exceed the VRAM size. A 
buffer that is needed next could have been swapped out to system RAM, dropping performance. 
In the worst case, this creates a ping-pong effect where buffers are constantly moved back 
and forth, dropping performance to single digits FPS.

AI theory
---------

Fragmentation
-------------

Training the network
--------------------

Cost model
~~~~~~~~~~

Activation function
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Results
-------

Discussion
----------

[bibliography]
Bibliography
------------

Larabel, M. 2013a. AMD's Radeon Gallium3D Starts Posing A Threat To Catalyst. Phoronix. 
Retrieved on Jan 15 2013.
http://www.phoronix.com/scan.php?page=article&item=amd_catalyst_gallium80

Catalyst 13.1 release notes. 2013. AMD Knowledge Base. Retrieved on Jan 15 2013.
http://support.amd.com/en-us/kb-articles/Pages/AMDCatalystSoftwareSuiteVersion131.aspx

Minimum playable FPS. 2012. Whirlpool forums. Retrieved on Jan 15 2013. 
http://forums.whirlpool.net.au/archive/1890684
